Key takeaways from a debate that featured tense clashes and closed with a Taylor Swift endorsement
By  STEVE PEOPLES, JONATHAN J. COOPER and NICHOLAS RICCARDI
Updated 7:34 AM EDT, September 11, 2024
Share
WASHINGTON (AP) — Donald Trump and Kamala Harris faced each other on the debate stage for the first — and possibly the last — time.

The Democratic vice president opened Tuesday night’s faceoff with a power move, marching across the stage to Trump’s lectern to shake his hand.

“Kamala Harris,” she said, introducing herself as the pair met for the first time ever. “Let’s have a good debate.”

“Nice to see you. Have fun,” the former Republican president responded.

The exchange set the tone for the 90-minute debate to come: Harris controlled the conversation at times, baiting Trump with jabs at his economic policy, his refusal to concede his 2020 election loss and even his performance at his rallies.

Trump, while measured early on, grew more annoyed as the night went on. And one significant moment played out after the two candidates left the stage, when megastar Taylor Swift said she’ll vote for Harris.

Kamala Harris and Donald Trump detail starkly different visions in tense debate:

Live updates: The Trump-Harris debate sets up a sprint to election day.
Major endorsement: Taylor Swift, calling herself a ‘childless cat lady,’ endorses Harris.
Memorable moments: The most notable — and quotable — exchanges
Stay informed: Follow the latest with breaking news email alerts. Sign up here.
Some takeaways on a historic debate:

Harris took the fight to Trump in a way that Biden could not
In her first answer, the former prosecutor said Trump’s tariffs would effectively create a sales tax on the middle class. She soon accused Trump of presiding over the worst attack on American democracy since the Civil War — the Capitol riot on Jan. 6, 2021. She charged him with telling women what they could do with their bodies. And she mocked Trump’s praise of dictators “who would eat you for lunch.”

Image
Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump and Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris participate during an ABC News presidential debate at the National Constitution Center, Tuesday, Sept.10, 2024, in Philadelphia. (AP Photo/Alex Brandon)

Harris effectively controlled much of the conversation with such attacks and baited Trump into responses that were at times vents, and at others, reminders of his wild rhetoric and fixation on the past.

“You did in fact lose that election,” Harris said of the 2020 race that Trump lost to Democrat Joe Biden but still insists he won. “Donald Trump was fired by 81 million people,” she said, referring to Biden’s winning vote total.

But Harris may have got under her opponent’s skin the most when she went after his performance at his rallies, noting that people often leave early.

RELATED COVERAGE
Image
Taylor Swift endorses Kamala Harris for president
Image
FACT FOCUS: A look at false and misleading claims made during Trump and Harris’ debate
Image
As Trump and Harris spar, ABC’s moderators grapple with conducting a debate in a polarized country
Growing visibly irritated, Trump insisted that his rallies were larger than hers.

A smiling Harris frequently shifted her message from Trump back to the American people.

“You will not hear him talk about your needs, your dreams and your needs and your desires,” Harris said. “And I’ll tell you, I believe you deserve a president who actually puts you first.”

Image
Members of the press appear in the spin room during a presidential debate between Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump, on screen at left, and Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris, right, Tuesday, Sept. 10, 2024, in Philadelphia. (AP Photo/Matt Slocum)

Trump had a label for Harris: ‘She is Biden’
Trump was often on defense, but he did drive the core message of his campaign: Inflation and immigration are hammering Americans.

Immigrants, Trump said, have “destroyed the fabric of our country.”

He repeatedly tied Harris to Biden.

“She is Biden,” he said.

“The worst inflation we’ve ever had,” Trump added. “A horrible economy because inflation has made it so bad. And she can’t get away with that.”

Harris responded: “Clearly, I am not Joe Biden and I am certainly not Donald Trump. And what I do offer is a new generation of leadership for our country.”

Trump also went after Harris for moving away from some of the progressive positions she took in the 2020 Democratic presidential primary, urging voters not to believe the more moderate tone she’s striking in this campaign.

“She’s going to my philosophy now. In fact, I was going to send her a MAGA hat,” he said, referring to the red “Make America Great Again” baseball caps that many of his supporters wear. “But if she ever got elected, she’d change it.”

Swift sings a praise for Harris
What to know about the 2024 Election

Today’s news: Follow live updates from the campaign trail from the AP.
Ground Game: Sign up for AP’s weekly politics newsletter to get it in your inbox every Monday.
AP’s Role: The Associated Press is the most trusted source of information on election night, with a history of accuracy dating to 1848. Learn more.
One of the most consequential moments came in a post on one of the most followed accounts on Instagram moments after the debate ended.

Swift has a loyal following among young women, a demographic Harris needs to turn out in big numbers. She called Harris a “gifted leader,” telling her fans to do their research and make their own decisions, but “I’ve done my research, and I’ve made my choice.”

Trump on race and Harris on the attack
ABC moderator David Muir asked Trump point-blank about his allegation last month that Harris had belatedly “ turned Black.” Harris is Black and South Asian and a graduate of Howard University, a historically Black school in Washington.

Trump tried to play down the matter. “I don’t care what she is, you make a big deal out of something, I couldn’t care less,” Trump said.

Harris, however, had her opening and she rattled off a long list of Trump’s racial controversies: his legal settlement for discrimination against prospective Black tenants at his New York apartment buildings in the 1970s; his ad calling for the execution of Black and Latino teenagers — who were wrongly arrested — in the Central Park jogger case in the 1980s; and his false claims that former President Barack Obama was not born in the United States.

“I think the American people want something better than that, want better than this,” Harris said.

Trump accused Harris of trying to “divide” people and dismissed her claims as dated and irrelevant.

“This is a person that has to stretch back 40, 50 years ago because there’s nothing now,” he said.

Harris and Trump dug in on abortion positions
Harris came out swinging in defense of abortion rights, perhaps the strongest issue for Democrats since Trump’s nominees created a Supreme Court majority to overturn the constitutional right to an abortion. Her sharp arguments provided a vivid contrast to President Joe Biden’s rambling comments on the issue during his June debate with Trump.

“The government, and Donald Trump, certainly should not be telling a woman what to do with her body,” Harris said. She painted a vivid picture of women facing medical complications, gut-wrenching decisions and the need to travel out of state for an abortion.

Trump was just as fierce in defense, saying he returned the issue to the states, an outcome he said many Americans wanted. He struggled with accuracy, however, repeating the false claim that Democrats support abortion even after babies are born. He stuck to that even after he was corrected by moderator Linsey Davis.

“I did a great service in doing that. It took courage to do it,” Trump said of the overturning of Roe v. Wade and its constitutional protections for abortion. “And the Supreme Court had great courage in doing it. And I give tremendous credit to those six justices.”

Polls has shown significant opposition to overturning Roe and voters have punished Republicans in recent elections for it.

Image
Republican presidential nominee former President Donald Trump shakes hands with Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris during an ABC News presidential debate at the National Constitution Center, Tuesday, Sept.10, 2024, in Philadelphia. (AP Photo/Alex Brandon)

Trump traded on a Harris talking point
Trump took a Harris talking point and directed it right back at her. It happened when he objected after Harris interrupted him.

“Wait a minute, I’m talking now,” Trump said. “Sound familiar?”

He was putting his own spin on a line Harris used famously against Mike Pence in the 2020 vice presidential debate when she rebuked Pence for interrupting, saying, “Mr. Vice President, I’m speaking.”

Harris made a pitch to Republican voters
In a divided nation, the election will ultimately be decided by a small slice of swing voters in only a handful of states. And in a nod toward that fact, Harris made an explicit appeal to voters across the political spectrum — including Republicans.

She noted that she is a gun owner. She cited the “late, great John McCain,” a reference to the Arizona Republican senator and war hero whom Trump criticized for being captured by enemy soldiers. And she listed the many Republicans who formerly served in the Trump administration who have now endorsed her campaign.

Trump, meanwhile, offered little outreach to voters in the middle, ignoring the calls for unity that framed his summertime convention speech.

Harris seized on the Jan. 6 attack on the Capitol to make another explicit appeal to undecided voters.

“It’s time to turn the page,” she said. “And if that was a bridge too far for you, well, there is a place in our campaign for you.”

Trump was restrained, except when he wasn’t
Democrats hoped and Republicans feared that Trump would lose his cool on stage. At first he didn’t, but as Harris increasingly got under his skin, he went to some dark places.

Trump amplified false rumors that Haitian immigrants in Ohio are eating pets — ABC’s Muir noted that local officials say that is not happening — as he argued that the Biden-Harris administration was admitting dangerous immigrants.

When Harris pressed him on the array of criminal and civil cases against him, Trump similarly fumed. He accused Harris and Biden of planting all the cases.

“I probably took a bullet to the head because of the things they said about me,” Trump said, referencing the assassination attempt in July by a gunman whose motives are unknown.

When pressed on whether he had any responsibility for Capitol riot, Trump raised his voice, blaming both Democratic Rep. Nancy Pelosi of California, who was the House speaker at the time, and the Democratic mayor of Washington. He said the rioters have “been treated so badly” and once again denied he lost the 2020 election.

Harris replied, “Donald Trump was fired by 81 million people, let’s be clear about that, and clearly he’s having a very difficult time processing that.”

There was an in-the-weeds exchange on the economy
The debate opened with an unexpectedly wonky exchange on the economy: Harris took on Trump for his plan to put in place sweeping tariffs and for the trade deficit he ran as president; Trump slammed Harris for inflation that he incorrectly said was the worst in the country’s history.

Trump said people look back on his presidency’s economy fondly. “I created one of the greatest economies in the history of our country,” he said. Harris flatly told viewers, “Donald Trump has no plan for you.”

Americans are slightly more likely to trust Trump over Harris when it comes to handling the economy, according to an Associated Press-NORC Center for Public Affairs poll from August.

Gender was an afterthought in the back-and-forth
Harris would be the nation’s first female president. But her gender was an afterthought during the debate.

She made no references to the historic nature of her candidacy. Neither did Trump.

And there were no performative moments in which gender was an issue. Who could forget Trump’s decision to stand behind his last female opponent, Hillary Clinton, during a 2016 debate? He also called Clinton a “nasty woman.” Afterward, Clinton said she was creeped out.

But on Tuesday night, both candidates stayed behind their podiums as instructed and there were no explicit jabs regarding gender.

Takeaways from the ABC presidential debate between Donald Trump and Kamala Harris
Eric Bradner Arit John Daniel Strauss Betsy Klein Gregory Krieg
By Eric Bradner, Arit John, Daniel Strauss, Betsy Klein and Gregory Krieg, CNN
 10 minute read 
Updated 12:33 AM EDT, Wed September 11, 2024




Gen Z TikTok THUMB 01.jpg
‘The algorithm plays a huge part.’ Meet the Gen Z creator making TikToks for Trump
02:39
ana.jpg
‘Wake up moment’: Ana Navarro on Marjorie Taylor Greene’s response to Laura Loomer
02:41
still_20935898_17075.333_still.jpg
New election rules in Georgia could jeopardize 2024 election vote certification
03:28
Former President Donald Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris debate for the first time during the presidential election campaign at The National Constitution Center on September 10 in Philadelphia.
Harris and Trump shake hands for the first time during debate
04:41
Former President Donald Trump speaks during a news conference held at Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles in Rancho Palos Verdes, California on Friday, September 13. 
Political scientist has theory why Trump keeps pushing debunked claim about Haitian immigrants
01:13
wpvi.jpg
Harris shares message to Trump voters during first solo interview after debate
02:43
still_20959374_75435_still.jpg
Smerconish says Kamala Harris won the debate. Hear why
03:08
Kamala Harris speaks during a campaign event in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, on September 13.
Reporter describes Harris' apparent strategy to run campaign as if she is running for mayor
02:01
still_20945983_1962901_still.jpg
Caputo shares reason why Trump keeps Loomer close
02:47
20240912-loomer_trump.jpg
Reporter asks Trump about GOP concern over Laura Loomer. Hear his response
02:25
20240913-trumpharrisrallies_full16x9.jpg
New poll reveals how voters are viewing Trump and Harris after the debate
02:26
A phone screen displays the Truth Social app in Washington, DC, on February 21, 2022.
Trump may soon have access to $2 billion
06:10
20240914-shelia_trump split.jpg
Haitian-American congresswoman reacts to Trump’s anti-immigrant claims
01:11
Former US President and Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump greets attendees as he arrives to speak at a campaign event at the Tucson Music Hall in Tucson, Arizona, September 12, 2024. (Photo by Rebecca NOBLE / AFP) (Photo by REBECCA NOBLE/AFP via Getty Images)
Trump supporters tell reporter why they left his rally early
01:54
bill.jpg
Hear what Bill O'Reilly thinks of Harris and Trump's debate performances
04:55
911 responder.jpg
9/11 responder reacts to Laura Loomer joining Trump at 9/11 event
01:05
Far-right activist Laura Loomer speaks to the media prior to the beginning of former President Donald Trump's Trial at Manhattan Criminal Court on April 15 in New York City.
Who is Laura Loomer, the right-wing activist in Trump’s inner circle?
02:50
still_20938654_481044.76499999996_still.jpg
Scaramucci’s theory on why there will be a second debate between Trump and Harris
01:25
20240910-boris_byron.jpg
Boris Sanchez presses GOP lawmaker about Trump’s comments on Harris’ race. Hear his response
03:57
deniro.jpg
'It's insanity': Robert De Niro on Trump's run for presidency
01:51
Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene and Right-wing activist Laura Loomer.
'Growing feud' between Marjorie Taylor Greene and far-right activist traveling with Trump
02:25
Gen Z TikTok THUMB 01.jpg
‘The algorithm plays a huge part.’ Meet the Gen Z creator making TikToks for Trump
02:39
ana.jpg
‘Wake up moment’: Ana Navarro on Marjorie Taylor Greene’s response to Laura Loomer
02:41
still_20935898_17075.333_still.jpg
New election rules in Georgia could jeopardize 2024 election vote certification
03:28
Former President Donald Trump and Vice President Kamala Harris debate for the first time during the presidential election campaign at The National Constitution Center on September 10 in Philadelphia.
Harris and Trump shake hands for the first time during debate
04:41
Former President Donald Trump speaks during a news conference held at Trump National Golf Club Los Angeles in Rancho Palos Verdes, California on Friday, September 13. 
Political scientist has theory why Trump keeps pushing debunked claim about Haitian immigrants
01:13
wpvi.jpg
Harris shares message to Trump voters during first solo interview after debate
02:43
Philadelphia
CNN
 — 
Kamala Harris baited Donald Trump for nearly all of the 1 hour and 45 minutes of their first and potentially only debate on Tuesday night – and Trump took every bit of it.

The vice president had prepared extensively for their debate, and peppered nearly every answer with a comment designed to enrage the former president. She told Trump that world leaders were laughing at him, and military leaders called him a “disgrace.” She called Trump “weak” and “wrong.” She said Trump was fired by 81 million voters – the number that voted for President Joe Biden in 2020.

“Clearly, he’s having a very difficult time processing that,” she said.

Republican presidential nominee, former U.S. President Donald Trump and Democratic presidential nominee, U.S. Vice President Kamala Harris both speak as they attend a presidential debate hosted by ABC in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, U.S., September 10, 2024. REUTERS/Brian Snyder
Related article
27 lines to explain the Trump-Harris presidential debate
Trump was often out of control. He loudly and repeatedly insisted that a whole host of falsehoods were true. The former president repeated lies about widespread fraud in the 2020 election. He parroted a conspiracy theory about immigrants eating pets, and lied about Democrats supporting abortions after babies are born – which is murder, and illegal everywhere.

He painted a dire picture of the United States, reminiscent of the “American carnage” he’d warned of when he was inaugurated in 2017.

“We have a nation that is dying,” Trump said Tuesday night.

As the debate ended, Harris got another boost: Musician and pop culture icon Taylor Swift posted on Instagram that she was backing the Democratic ticket. She signed her post “Taylor Swift, Childless Cat Lady” — a reference to controversial comments by Trump’s running mate, Ohio Sen. JD Vance, that have alienated many women.

Harris speaks during a presidential debate with Trump on Tuesday in Philadelphia.
Harris speaks during a presidential debate with Trump on Tuesday in Philadelphia. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images
Here are some quick takeaways from the first portion of the debate:

A turning point when Harris jabs Trump over the size of his rally crowds
Harris came onstage with a clear plan: Throw Trump off his game.

It was, by any measure, a dramatic success. When the vice president mentioned Trump’s criminal conviction and outstanding legal issues, he bit. When she called him out for sinking a bipartisan immigration bill, he bit harder. And when Harris suggested Trump’s rallies were boring, he nearly choked on the bait.

Rather than engage on the issues raised by the moderators, including a few that Trump considers some of his political strengths, the former president went on at length about the entertainment value of his rallies, claims the Biden administration was legally targeting him and, in a long, bizarre spell, insisted – against all available evidence, that migrants were eating Americans’ pets.

“They’re eating the dogs, the people that came in, they’re eating the cats, they’re eating the pets of the people that live there,” Trump said, after Harris criticized him for tanking the immigration bill.

Harris looked on as though she was puzzled, but rarely returned to the claims, apparently content to allow Trump go off.

Trump seemed especially aggrieved by the vice president’s aside about his campaign events. Even after Muir sought to redirect the debate to immigration – again, one of Trump’s preferred topics – the former president refused to let it go.

“First, let me respond as to the rallies,” Trump said, mocking Harris’ crowds before returning to his own. “People don’t leave my rallies, we have the biggest rallies, the most incredible rallies in the history of politics.”

The first hour of the debate then ended much like it began – with Trump off on a long, narrowcast tangent about the 2020 election, which he claimed, falsely once again, was stolen from him.


Trump to Harris: 'I'm talking now'
00:32 - Source: CNN
Trump traffics in conspiracy theories
Despite signals from even his running mate, Trump did not refrain from repeating the conspiracy theory du jour during the debate.

The former president brought up the unfounded conspiracy theory that migrants from Haiti living in Springfield, Ohio, are eating people’s cats and dogs.

He said at one point “in Springfield, they’re eating the dogs. They’re eating the cats. They’re eating the pets of people who live there.”

When ABC News moderator David Muir pointed out that city officials denied any evidence that migrants in Springfield were actually eating pets, Trump doubled down, saying “the people on television” were saying it. When pressed, Trump just said, “We’ll find out.”

When the debate moved to crime, Trump claimed that crime was up in the United States contrary to the rest of the world. There too Muir pointed out that, according to FBI data, crime had actually declined in the past few years.

Trump, again, deferred to a different conspiracy theory that the FBI is deeply corrupt and issuing “defrauding statements.” He argued “it was a fraud.”

Later in the debate, Trump argued that US elections are “a mess” and claimed that Democrats are trying to get undocumented immigrants to vote in elections.

Trump speaks during the presidential debate with Harris in Philadelphia on Tuesday.
Trump speaks during the presidential debate with Harris in Philadelphia on Tuesday. Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty Images
Fierce argument over abortion, a key issue for both candidates
Few moments highlighted the difference between Biden’s June debate performance and Harris’ on Tuesday as much as the abortion debate.

The vice president, who has long been one the administration’s strongest surrogates on reproductive rights, was able to respond to the former president’s defense of his abortion policy in a way Biden was not.

The former president, who appointed three of the Supreme Court judges who overturned federal abortion protections, has sought to moderate his stance on the issue by criticizing six-week abortion bans and reiterating his support for exceptions for rape, incest and the life of the mother. But he has also defended the overturning of Roe v. Wade.

“Now it’s not tied up in the federal government,” Trump said. “I did a great service in doing it. It took courage to do it.”

Trump repeated several of the arguments he made about abortion during his June debate with Biden. He argued that “everyone” wanted the issue returned to the states, despite widespread resistance from Democrats and some independents. He argued inaccurately that a former governor of Virginia said that babies should be executed – a reference to comments former Democratic Gov. Ralph Northam, a doctor, made about care for births after nonviable pregnancies.

And Trump repeated the false claim that some states allow abortions to be performed after a baby has been born, which drew a fact check from ABC News’ Linsey Davis.

“There is no state in this country where it is legal to kill a baby after it’s born,” Davis said.

Harris responded by highlighting cases where women have been unable to get abortions after being victims of rape or struggled to get miscarriage care.

“You want to talk about this is what people wanted?” Harris said. “Pregnant women who want to carry a pregnancy to term, suffering from a miscarriage, being denied care in an emergency room because the health care providers are afraid they might go to jail, and she’s bleeding out in a car in the parking lot – she didn’t want that.”


Trump was asked why women should support him on abortion. See his response
05:12 - Source: CNN
Vice president casts Trump as out for himself
Seeking to introduce herself to voters, Harris set the tone early, drawing contrast with Trump by framing herself as an advocate for middle-class Americans – and framing her opponent as self-absorbed.

“Donald Trump has no plan for you,” Harris said in response to a question on the economy, looking into the camera in a direct appeal to voters.

Leaning into her personal biography as she cast herself as a “middle class kid,” Harris outlined an economic vision including tax cuts for families and tax deductions for small businesses, while Trump, she said, will “do what he has done before, which is to provide a tax cut for billionaires and big corporations.”

Trump, Harris continued, “actually has no plan for you, because he is more interested in defending himself than he is in looking out for you.”

Her campaign has argued in its ads and talking points that Trump is a candidate looking out for himself, and Harris took that message to the debate stage Tuesday.

“I will tell you, the one thing you will not hear him talk about is you. And I’ll tell you: I believe you deserve a president who actually puts you first,” she said.

A handshake sets the tone
When Harris and Trump walked onto stage in Philadelphia, it was the first time they’d met in person. Trump, after all, skipped Biden’s inauguration.

Harris set the tone by walking across the six feet separating her podium from Trump’s and reaching out for a handshake. She introduced herself and said, “Let’s have a good debate.”

“Nice to see you,” Trump responded.

It was the first handshake in a presidential debate since Trump and Hillary Clinton squared off in 2016. Trump famously loomed uncomfortably close to Clinton during their town hall-style debate.

Trump generally looked forward as Harris spoke, while the vice president communicated through facial expressions. She laughed at some Trump comments, smirked at others, shook her head at some and at times appeared bemused.

When Trump repeated a debunked myth about Haitian immigrants eating pets in Springfield, Ohio, Harris laughed mockingly while shrugging and pointing at Trump.


Trump says he 'couldn't care less' about Harris' race. Hear her response
02:53 - Source: CNN
Trump’s comments about Harris’ race, past controversies under the microscope
When Trump was asked about his comment last month falsely claiming Harris only recently started to identify as Black, the former president defended his remarks as something he’d read somewhere.

“I couldn’t care less,” Trump said. “Whatever she wants to be is OK with me.”

In the weeks since those comments, the vice president has avoided engaging in that personal attack beyond calling it the “same old tired playbook.”

At the Philadelphia event, however, Harris responded to Trump’s attacks on her identity a meaningful way. But instead of defending her indisputable racial identity, the vice president laid out the former president’s history of past racial discrimination and racist behavior.

That history includes investigations of housing discrimination, calling for the death penalty for the Central Park Five – young teenagers of color falsely accused and convicted of raping and assaulting a woman in the New York park – and fueling the false birther allegation that former President Barack Obama was not born in the United states.

“And I think the American people want better than that. Want better than this,” Harris said. “We see in each other a friend. We see in each other a neighbor. We don’t want a leader who is constantly trying to have Americans point their fingers at each other.”

Trump pushed back, arguing that others, such as former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, also supported the case against the Central Park Five. He called the Biden-Harris administration divisive and argued that the vice president’s examples were outdated.

“This is a person that has to stretch back years – 40, 50 years ago – because there’s nothing now,” he said.


Harris reacts to Trump doubling down on debunked rumors about immigrants eating pets
03:20 - Source: CNN
Trump and Harris dig their heels in on major global flashpoints
If anyone on stage Tuesday has a clear, point-by-point plan for ending the wars in Gaza and Ukraine, they did not share it with the viewers at home.

Asked how she would secure peace in Gaza, Harris first recalled the horrors of Hamas’ October 7, 2023, attacks inside Israel. She offered some mild criticism of Israel’s response, an ongoing bombardment that’s killed tens of thousands of Palestinians, before pivoting to her support for a two-state solution, Israel’s right to defend itself and a commitment to rebuilding Gaza.

“We need a ceasefire deal and we need the hostages out,” Harris declared. Biden and others recently conceded such an agreement is a long way off.

Trump offered even fewer details.

“She hates Israel,” he said of Harris, adding that she also hates “Arabs.”

Trump has occasionally sought to inflame anger among Arab Americans over Biden’s handling of the conflict. But on Tuesday he quickly abandoned the tactic, instead chiding Harris for slighting Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu during a recent visit to Capitol Hill – she did, in fact, meet with him; she did not attend his speech to Congress – and declaring again that none of it “would have never happened” if he were still in the White House.

Ditto for the Russian war in Ukraine, per the former president, who – after stopping to note that he “know(s) Putin very well – said “Russia would have never ever … have gone into Ukraine” on his watch.

“I’ll get it done before even becoming president,” Trump added, claiming his election would reset the geopolitical state of play and, almost by definition, herald a deal.

Harris, for her part, used the Russia-Ukraine talk to attack Trump over his well-documented fondness for international strongmen and despots.

“It is well-known that these dictators and autocrats are rooting for you to be president again,” Harris said, “because it is so clear they can manipulate you with flatter and favors.”

Trump fought back there, recalling his push to get NATO member nations to pay more into the alliance and slamming Harris for Biden’s refusal to do the same, before saying the vice president “does not have the courage to ask.”

Air Force Two, carrying Harris, arrives in Philadelphia on Monday.
Teleprompters are seen in the spin room on Monday.
A countdown clock over debate moderators David Muir and Linsey Davis shows how much time former President Donald Trump has left to answer a question during Tuesday’s debate with Vice President Kamala Harris.
A countdown clock over debate moderators David Muir and Linsey Davis shows how much time former President Donald Trump has left to answer a question during Tuesday’s debate with Vice President Kamala Harris.
Michael Le Brecht II/ABC News
Trump talks with Fox News host Sean Hannity after the debate. Trump also spoke with other journalists, <a href="https://www.cnn.com/politics/live-news/trump-harris-debate-abc-09-10-24#h_649ba00bcedcb5fa8a12ba1525e045ea">including CNN's Kaitlan Collins</a>. “This was my best debate,” he told Collins as he defended his performance.
Harris greets her husband, Douglas Emhoff, after the debate, which took place at the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia.
Trump walks off stage at the end of the debate. Harris and Trump <a href="https://www.cnn.com/politics/live-news/trump-harris-debate-abc-09-10-24#h_151e4fa26d864661756603071c775f83">didn't interact after the debate ended</a>.
Trump speaks during the debate. Just a few months ago, he was debating President Joe Biden.
The debate is seen on a screen at the Pennsylvania Convention Center, which was the site of the debate "spin room" in Philadelphia. The spin room is where supporters of each candidate put their “spin” on the debate as they talk with journalists.
Trump supporter Pat Tuttle watches the debate from Jonathan's Grille in Nashville, Tennessee.
Harris reenacts the thumbs-down gesture that former Sen. John McCain used to vote against a repeal of the Affordable Care Act in 2017.
People attend a debate watch party at the Dew Drop Inn in Washington, DC.
Trump appears on a screen next to the debate's countdown clock.
Harris averages 49% support across recent polls while Trump stands at 48% in the latest <a href="https://www.cnn.com/politics/live-news/trump-harris-debate-abc-09-10-24#h_7346d56f9c1818fdf4cd768b64fc0a47">CNN Poll of Polls</a>. That average suggests no clear leader in the race.
Harris listens to Trump answer a question on Tuesday. ABC’s rules for the debate stipulated that the other candidate’s microphone would be muted while their opponent spoke. So the candidates often used <a href="https://www.cnn.com/politics/live-news/trump-harris-debate-abc-09-10-24#h_f9c88519e918eda82e972320d6144732">facial expressions to communicate their thoughts</a>. There was also some crosstalk allowed on occasion.
Screens show the debate outside the Nasdaq MarketSite in New York.
Harris answers a question during the debate. This was the first time she and Trump had met.
Trump makes an expression during the debate.
People watch the debate at the Union Pub in Washington, DC.
Harris responds to a question. <a href="https://www.cnn.com/2024/09/10/politics/debate-takeaways-trump-harris/index.html">She baited Trump repeatedly</a>, peppering nearly every answer with a comment designed to enrage the former president. She said Trump was fired by 81 million voters — the number that voted for President Joe Biden in 2020. “Clearly, he’s having a very difficult time processing that,” she said.
Sheena Carey laughs as she watches the debate in Milwaukee.
During the debate, Trump <a href="https://www.cnn.com/2024/09/10/politics/debate-takeaways-trump-harris/index.html">painted a dire picture of the United States</a>, reminiscent of the “American carnage” he’d warned of when he was inaugurated in 2017. “We have a nation that is dying,” Trump said Tuesday.
People watch the debate on a cross-country flight.
Harris writes notes during a commercial break.
Trump and Harris stand on stage at the start of the debate.
Members of the media watch the debate from the nearby spin room in Philadelphia.
Trump and Harris <a href="https://www.cnn.com/politics/live-news/trump-harris-debate-abc-09-10-24#h_757fb811ffaca5661c1454f7675d9cb0">shake hands</a> at the start of the debate. Harris walked over to Trump and extended her hand. He accepted the handshake. Harris introduced herself by name and said, “Let’s have a good debate.” Trump responded: “Nice to see you. Have fun.”
Trump rides in a car after arriving at the Philadelphia International Airport on Tuesday.
Pro-Palestinian protesters block roads as they rally in front of Philadelphia City Hall on Tuesday.
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. talks to the media Tuesday in Philadelphia. Kennedy suspended his independent presidential bid last month, urging his supporters to back Trump.
A car decorated with American flags drives past the metal fencing surrounding the National Constitution Center on Tuesday.
Former Trump officials Anthony Scaramucci and Olivia Troye, who both support Harris, talk to reporters in the spin room before the debate.
Images of Harris and Trump are seen on a screen inside the spin room before the debate.
A woman holds Lilly the dog near the National Constitution Center on Tuesday.
Law enforcement officers gather across the street from the National Constitution Center on Tuesday.
An ABC News banner is assembled as preparations are made in the spin room before the debate.
Air Force Two, carrying Harris, arrives in Philadelphia on Monday.
Teleprompters are seen in the spin room on Monday.
A countdown clock over debate moderators David Muir and Linsey Davis shows how much time former President Donald Trump has left to answer a question during Tuesday’s debate with Vice President Kamala Harris.
Trump talks with Fox News host Sean Hannity after the debate. Trump also spoke with other journalists, <a href="https://www.cnn.com/politics/live-news/trump-harris-debate-abc-09-10-24#h_649ba00bcedcb5fa8a12ba1525e045ea">including CNN's Kaitlan Collins</a>. “This was my best debate,” he told Collins as he defended his performance.
In pictures: Harris and Trump face off in presidential debate
1 of 35
PrevNext
Harris replied that she believed Trump might, in fact, put a quick end to the war – by capitulating to Putin. And in so doing, she added, endangering Poland on Ukraine’s western border.  (Pennsylvania has a large Polish-American population, Harris noted.)

Trump repeatedly brought up the administration’s handling of the US’ withdrawal from Afghanistan, arguing it showed weakness in the White House and that Biden did not fire enough people in response to it. Harris said she agreed with Biden’s decision to pull US troops out of Afghanistan in 2021, asserting that Trump “negotiated one of the weakest deals you can imagine” on the matter during his time as president.

Trump – having been accused repeatedly of going starry-eyed for strongmen – quoted the one running Hungary, Prime Minister Viktor Orban.

“Orban said it, he said, ‘The most respected, most feared person is Donald Trump. We had no problems when Trump was president,’” Trump said.

6 key takeaways from the first Harris-Trump presidential debate
Harris diminished Trump as a wannabe dictator, while the former president went after the vice president as a radical. Both sought to claim the mantle of change.
Kamala Harris and Donald Trump at the debate, surrounded by stars
Kamala Harris and Donald Trump met for the first time in Philadelphia for a presidential debate Tuesday.Chelsea Stahl / NBC News


Save
Create your free profile or log in to save this article
Sept. 10, 2024, 10:45 PM EDT / Updated Sept. 11, 2024, 9:03 AM EDT
By Sahil Kapur
Kamala Harris and Donald Trump clashed in their first presidential debate Tuesday in Philadelphia, less than two months before Election Day.

Heading into the debate, Harris appeared to have more to gain — and more to lose. A New York Times/Siena College poll found that 28% said they “need to learn more about Kamala Harris,” compared with just 9% who said the same about Trump. Overall, Trump led Harris by 1 point among likely voters, with 5% unsure or not backing either.

The debate covered a wide range of issues and featured a series of intense exchanges between the two bitter rivals. Harris presented herself as a pragmatic problem-solver and diminished Trump as a wannabe dictator who can't keep his rally crowds engaged. Trump attacked Harris as a radical and frequently returned to his theme of criticizing migration, sometimes veering into conspiracy theories.

Here are six key takeaways from the debate.

Harris leans in quickly on lowering costs

Harris highlights her 'opportunity economy' in contrast to Trump
03:06
Harris used the first question to lean into her plan for an "opportunity economy," seeking to cut into Trump's advantage on the issue with swing voters by presenting herself as the candidate of the middle class while calling Trump a corporate tax-cutter.

"I was raised as a middle-class kid, and I am actually the only person on this stage who has a plan that is about lifting up the middle class and working people of America," Harris said. "We know that we have a shortage of homes and housing, and the cost of housing is too expensive for far too many people. We know that young families need support to raise their children, and I intend on extending a tax cut for those families of $6,000, which is the largest child tax credit that we have given in a long time, so that those young families can afford to buy a crib, buy a car seat, buy clothes for their children."

Trump blasted the Biden-Harris economy, saying, “I’ve never seen a worse period of time.” He also defended his tariff plans and called Harris “a Marxist,” even as he accused her of copying his policies: “I was going to send her a MAGA hat.”


'Run, Spot, run': Trump accuses Harris of copying Biden's economy plans
01:06
Both candidates seek the mantle of change
In the opening minutes, both rivals sought to claim the mantle of change in a country full of voters who are hungry for it.

“In this debate tonight, you’re going to hear from the same old, tired playbook: a bunch of lies, grievances and name-calling," Harris said of Trump. "What you’re going to hear tonight is a detailed and dangerous plan called Project 2025 that the former president intends on implementing if he were elected.”

Harris returned to that message later in the debate: “The American people are exhausted with the same old, tired playbook.” She went back to it later in criticizing Trump for inciting the Jan. 6 riot.

“Let’s turn the page on this. Let’s not go back,” she said.

Trump sought to portray Harris as a continuation of President Joe Biden on immigration and the economy.

On migrants coming into the U.S. illegally, he said: “These are the people that she and Biden led into our country, and they’re destroying our country. They’re dangerous.”

And on the economy, he said: “She copied Biden’s plan. And it’s, like, four sentences. Run, Spot, run.”

Trump attacks as Harris defends policy shifts
A significant weakness for Harris in the campaign has been the left-wing positions she took as a Democratic presidential primary candidate in 2020 that she has since abandoned or backtracked from — such as banning fracking, mandating buybacks of semiautomatic firearms and decriminalizing border crossings. She was asked about her evolution again.

“I made that very clear in 2020, I will not ban fracking,” Harris said. “I have not banned fracking as vice president. In fact, I was the tiebreaking vote on the inflation Reduction Act, which opened new leases for fracking,” an ecologically controversial way to extract oil and natural gas.

Harris added, “My values have not changed.”

Recommended

2024 Election
Harris campaign targets Latinos in boxing and baseball ad blitz

2024 Election
GOP efforts to crack down on noncitizen voting extend to state ballot measures
Trump sought to capitalize.

“She wants to do transgender operations on illegal aliens that are in prison. This is a radical left liberal that would do this. She wants to confiscate your guns, and she will never allow fracking in Pennsylvania,” he said. “If she won the election, fracking in Pennsylvania will end on Day One.”

Trump dodges on vetoing federal abortion ban
Trump and Harris engaged in a lengthy clash over abortion, during which Trump declined twice to say whether he would veto a federal abortion ban if Congress passed one.

“Well, I won’t have to,” Trump replied. He said he’s “not signing” such a ban because there’s “no reason to,” arguing that “everybody” is happy with the termination of Roe v. Wade.

When told that his vice presidential nominee, Sen. JD Vance, of Ohio, said he would veto such a ban, Trump contradicted Vance, who made his comments recently on NBC News' "Meet the Press."

"Well, I didn’t discuss it with JD, in all fairness. JD — and I don’t mind if he has a certain view, but I don't think he was speaking for me," he said, arguing that Congress won't pass any major abortion bill.

Harris said: “I pledge to you: When Congress passes a bill to put back in place the protections of Roe v. Wade as president of the United States, I will proudly sign it in to law. But understand, if Donald Trump were to be re-elected, he will sign a national abortion ban.”


'She’s bleeding out in a car': Harris addresses abortion rights
02:20
Harris baits Trump into missed opportunities
Harris came into the debate with the hope of rattling Trump, and she appeared to succeed at some moments, baiting him into a defensive posture rather than highlighting his strongest issue: concerns about inflation and the cost of living.

She attacked him on abortion rights, linked him to the right-wing policy blueprint Project 2025 and highlighted his praise for Chinese President Xi Jinping around the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic. Both times, he jumped in to defend himself. She invited Americans to watch a Trump rally.

“He talks about fictional characters like Hannibal Lecter. He will talk about ‘windmills cause cancer.’ And what you will also notice is that people start leaving his rallies early out of exhaustion and boredom,” Harris said, looking into the camera.

That didn’t sit well with Trump, who said he has “the most incredible rallies in the history of politics” and went on a tangent by citing a debunked conspiracy theory about some migrants’ eating pets. “They’re eating the dogs, the people that came in, they’re eating the cats,” he said.


Trump repeats false claim about immigrants 'eating' dogs, cats in Ohio
01:03
Trump bashes Biden, sparking pithy Harris reply
Trump’s performance included a wide sprinkling of attacks on Biden, who dropped out after his disastrous late-June debate showing against Trump. He criticized Biden’s handling of classified documents, knocked him for opposing the Keystone XL pipeline and called the Biden administration “the most divisive presidency in the history of our country.”

“Where is our president? We don’t even know if he’s the president,” Trump said toward the end of the debate. “They threw him out of a campaign like a dog. We don’t even know. Is he our president? We have a president that doesn’t know he’s alive.”

Harris replied, “It is important to remind the former president: You’re not running against Joe Biden; you are running against me.”

When Trump said later, “She is Biden,” Harris responded: “Clearly, I am not Joe Biden. And I am certainly not Donald Trump.”

Harris Dominates as Trump Gets Defensive: 6 Takeaways From the Debate
Laying out bait that Donald Trump eagerly snatched, the vice president owned much of the night, keeping him on the back foot and avoiding sustained attention on her own vulnerabilities.

Share full article


1.8k
Video

transcript

0:00/1:24
Trump and Harris Clash in a Fiery Presidential Debate
In their first face-to-face meeting, Kamala Harris put Donald Trump on the defensive as the former president tried to tie her to unpopular Biden administration policies.
“Kamala Harris. Let’s have a good debate.” “Nice to see you, have fun.” “Thank you.” “You will see during the course of his rallies, he talks about fictional characters like Hannibal Lecter. He will talk about windmills cause cancer. And what you will also notice is that people start leaving his rallies early out of exhaustion and boredom.” “Your running mate, JD Vance, has said that you would veto if it did come to your desk.” “Well, I didn’t discuss it with JD, in all fairness.” “She copied Biden’s plan. And it’s like four sentences — like, ‘Run, Spot, Run’ — four sentences that are just, ‘Oh, we’ll try and lower taxes.’ She doesn’t have a plan.” “Let’s not go back. We’re not going back. It’s time to turn the page. Let’s turn the page. Turn the page on this same, old, tired rhetoric.”

Trump and Harris Clash in a Fiery Presidential Debate

1:24

In their first face-to-face meeting, Kamala Harris put Donald Trump on the defensive as the former president tried to tie her to unpopular Biden administration policies.CreditCredit...Doug Mills/The New York Times
Shane GoldmacherKatie Rogers
By Shane Goldmacher and Katie Rogers
Published Sept. 11, 2024
Updated Sept. 13, 2024
Leer en español
Follow along with live updates on the Trump and Harris campaigns.

Kamala Harris commanded the first debate against Donald J. Trump, flashing her prosecutorial skills to leverage every chance to get under the former president’s skin in a 90-minute clash of visions and style.

They disagreed fiercely on abortion and the economy, immigration and the war in Ukraine. But throughout the night, Mr. Trump found himself in a defensive crouch, relitigating his record rather than picking apart hers.

The contrast was apparent even on mute. She smiled. He glowered. He spoke more, but she dictated the terms of the evening.

Here are six takeaways from a debate that was a remarkable reversal from June, when Democrats were so despondent they changed candidates afterward:

Harris set traps. Trump leaped into them.
ImageKamala Harris, right, and Donald Trump shaking hands on the debate stage at Mr. Trump’s lectern.
The candidates’ handshake was the first in a presidential debate since 2016.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times
Ms. Harris strode across the room to deliver the first handshake in a presidential debate since 2016. It was the first time she had met Mr. Trump in person, and she was intent on introducing herself: “Kamala Harris,” she said, as he took her hand. “Have fun,” he instructed her.

She sure appeared to. He did not.

Ms. Harris dominated the proceedings from nearly the start. She laid bait. He took it. It began with her needling Mr. Trump that his bored supporters had been leaving his rallies. It continued with her comment that he had inherited riches from his father. And on it went as she invoked his Republican critics, including those who served in his administration.

On the back foot, Mr. Trump repeatedly spun down rhetorical cul-de-sacs.

At one point, Ms. Harris invited viewers to watch a Trump rally for a more unfiltered view of the former president. “You will not hear him talk about your needs,” she said.

He responded not by talking about voter needs but about crowd numbers.

“People don’t leave my rallies,” he pushed back.

He went on to invoke debunked claims on the right that immigrants are eating pets in an Ohio city, which led to fact-checking pushback from David Muir, one of the ABC News moderators.

Editors’ Picks

The Truth About ‘Man Flu’

They Wanted a House in Chicago for Their Growing Family. Would $650,000 Be Enough?

The No. 1 Breaker in the World Is … Raygun?
“Talk about extreme,” Ms. Harris laughed her rival off.

Trump played defense on his record.
Image
A TV screen in a bar shows Donald Trump during the debate. A Kamala Harris campaign sign is on a window.
Mr. Trump was frequently on the defensive on Tuesday night. Credit...Nicole Craine for The New York Times
Within the first five minutes, Ms. Harris looked into the camera and told viewers what to expect from Mr. Trump: “the same old, tired playbook, a bunch of lies, grievances and name-calling.”

He indeed talked less about what he would do in a second term and spent more time trying to clarify his record. He defended his handling of the pandemic, his decision to fire his top military advisers, and even his seven-year-old response to the deadly far-right rally in Charlottesville, Va.

Mr. Trump fumbled a moment where he had hoped to go on offense: the Biden-Harris administration’s handling of the chaotic Afghanistan withdrawal. Instead, he found himself defending his decision to invite the Taliban to Camp David in 2019.

Ms. Harris forced Mr. Trump to defend his closeness to authoritarians like Prime Minister Viktor Orban of Hungary and his past courtship of Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, “a dictator who would eat you for lunch,” she said. She even goaded him by turning an epithet he calls her — “weak” — toward him on national security.

He called her “weak” back.

Ms. Harris looked straight into the camera as she pitched herself as the candidate of the future and forced him to defend the violence on Jan. 6, 2021. “We don’t have to go back,” she said. “Let’s not go back.”

Harris seized the advantage on abortion.
Image
Kamala Harris smiling and holding a microphone in front of a crowd with her husband looking on.
Ms. Harris stopped at a watch party in Philadelphia after the debate.Credit...Haiyun Jiang for The New York Times
Abortion was one of the biggest missed opportunities for President Biden in his first debate. It was one of Ms. Harris’s strongest moments in hers.

Mr. Trump is keenly aware of his vulnerability on abortion, having appointed the Supreme Court justices who helped overturn Roe v. Wade. Yet on Tuesday he danced around the issue of potentially vetoing a national ban.

“As far as the abortion ban, no, I’m not in favor of abortion ban,” he said. “But it doesn’t matter because this issue has now been taken over by the states.”

He even rebutted his own vice-presidential pick, Senator JD Vance of Ohio, who has previously expressed openness to a national ban. “I didn’t discuss it with JD, in all fairness,” Mr. Trump said.

Mr. Trump, 78, sounded his age as he tried to articulate his position on in vitro fertilization: “I have been a leader on fertilization,” he declared.

Ms. Harris, 59, had laced into Mr. Trump. She called his position on abortion “insulting to the women of America” and said she had met women across the country whose health and lives had been endangered by abortion restrictions.

A Harris campaign official said the exchange on abortion, delivered in the first half-hour with viewership at its highest, was one of the night’s best in her team’s testing of voters in swing states.

Trump didn’t hide his disdain of Harris.
Image
Donald Trump gestures with his left hand while standing behind a lectern during the debate.
“People don’t leave my rallies,” Mr. Trump pushed back at one point, leaving Ms. Harris’s more substantive charges unanswered.Credit...Doug Mills/The New York Times
For much of the debate, Ms. Harris expressed her feelings about Mr. Trump by letting her body language do the talking: putting her hand on her chin, laughing and pursing her lips with a puzzled look.

Mr. Trump, who seemed intent on avoiding looking in Ms. Harris’s direction, expressed his feelings by yelling into the microphone.

Ms. Harris warned that world leaders were “laughing at Donald Trump” and saw him as a “disgrace.” And when she referred to his 2020 election loss as the moment he was “fired by 81 million people,” he grew visibly angry.

When Ms. Harris brought up his criminal convictions, Mr. Trump baselessly accused Democrats — and, by extension, Ms. Harris — of turning the judicial system against him: “I probably took a bullet to the head because of the things that they say about me,” he said. At one point, when Ms. Harris tried to interject over a muted mic, Mr. Trump, well versed in extemporaneous insults, used one of her memorable lines from the 2020 vice-presidential debate against her.

“I’m talking now, if you don’t mind, please,” a visibly annoyed Mr. Trump said. “Does that sound familiar?”

Mr. Trump also fumbled a question about his past comments questioning Ms. Harris’s racial identity. “All I can say is, I read where she was not Black, that she put out. And I’ll say that, and then I read that she was Black. And that’s OK. Either one was OK with me. That’s up to her,” he said. “That’s up to her.”

She called his use of race to divide Americans “a tragedy.”

Harris missed some opportunities.
Image
A hand reaching to pick up a Kamala Harris button amid a pile of Harris and Trump buttons and stickers and pins.
Campaign trinkets for sale outside the debate venue.Credit...Graham Dickie/The New York Times
One of Mr. Trump’s few memorable lines, even if it came off a bit canned, was when he mocked Ms. Harris for the lack of detail in her agenda.

“She copied Biden’s plan. And it’s like, four sentences,” he said, “Like, ‘Run, Spot, Run.’”

In her response, Ms. Harris bored into Mr. Trump’s agenda rather than her own. It was typical of a debate in which she appeared most at ease talking about Mr. Trump rather than fleshing out her own plans for the presidency.

When asked by the moderators to explain a list of her policy reversals, including her early support for banning fracking and decriminalizing border crossings, Ms. Harris addressed only the first one after promising to discuss them all: “I will not ban fracking,” she said, before turning quickly to Mr. Trump’s upbringing as the son of a real estate developer.

In fact, the only moment Ms. Harris showed any nerves was in the very first answer, when she tried to pack many of her economic plans — a child tax credit, a small-business tax deduction — into a single response.

Trump missed Biden.
Image
Donald Trump standing in the middle of a crowd of reporters, many of them holding up phones or cameras to record him.
After the debate, Mr. Trump visited the spin room.Credit...Graham Dickie/The New York Times
One of Mr. Trump’s goals had been to tie Ms. Harris to Mr. Biden’s most unpopular policies, particularly on the economy and immigration, accusing the Biden-Harris administration of allowing “millions” of migrants across the southwestern border.

He failed to do so for most of the night. Instead, he mocked a man he seemed to miss running against. “You’ll wake him up at 4 in the afternoon,” Mr. Trump said at one point of Mr. Biden.

Ms. Harris pressed her rival on his fixation. “It’s important to remind the former president,” she said, “you’re not running against Joe Biden, you’re running against me.”

The Trump campaign has cast Ms. Harris in ads as “dangerously liberal.” But on Tuesday he veered within a minute from saying she was mimicking him so much he was considering sending her “a MAGA hat” to calling her a “Marxist.”

It wasn’t until his closing statement that Mr. Trump truly appeared to find his rhythm linking her to Mr. Biden. “She’s going to do all these wonderful things,” he said of her various promises. “Why hasn’t she done it?”

She didn’t have to answer, because the debate was over.

But Mr. Trump wasn’t done. Ever the salesman, he went to the spin room to review his own performance.

“It was the best debate I’ve ever had,” he said.

Harris won the debate — and it wasn’t close
Our takeaways from the Harris-Trump debate.

The Harris-Walz Debate Watch Party at Cherry Street Pier in Philadelphia.
People watch the ABC News Presidential Debate during a Harris-Walz Debate Watch Party at Cherry Street Pier in Philadelphia, on Sept. 10, 2024. | Jamie Kelter Davis for POLITICO

By POLITICO Staff

09/11/2024 12:33 AM EDT

Kamala Harris showed up — and then some.

The vice president’s performance against Donald Trump, in which she repeatedly baited him and knocked him off balance, was a far cry from President Joe Biden’s disastrous June debate. And it gave Democrats the role reversal they had hoped for after their switch at the top of the ticket.

The two candidates entered the debate deadlocked in the polls — and in a deeply polarized nation, the race is still likely to remain close. But voters got their first look at Harris going toe-to-toe with Trump, and she did more than hold her own.

Key Moments from the Harris-Trump Debate | Politico Daily Briefing

SharePlay Video
We asked five POLITICO campaign reporters and editors for their takeaways from the Harris-Trump debate:

Who had the better night?

Steve Shepard: All you have to do is check the sound levels on Trump’s microphone from the start of the debate to its end to see that Harris came out ahead. A debate that began with a question that should favor Trump — are Americans better off economically than they were four years ago — quickly turned against the former president. Even when the debate returned to the friendly terrain of immigration, Harris set a trap for Trump that had him talking about the size of crowds at his campaign rallies and fever-swamp tales of abducted pets in short order — and at an increasing volume that made it clear he knew things were not going his way.

Elena Schneider: Harris won this debate. Her goals for it were clear: Draw a contrast with Trump by casting herself as the change candidate who could move voters into the future. Throughout the debate, Harris spoke directly into the camera, urging voters to “turn the page” on Trump. The former president, meanwhile, primarily focused on the litigating the past, including an extended back-and-forth over whether he won the 2020 election. (He did not.)

Harris: 'Trump was fired by 81 million people'

SharePlay Video
Adam Wren: Harris won — and it wasn’t close. She showed up as her prosecutorial self, effectively putting Trump in the witness stand throughout much of the debate. Democrats have to be downright giddy, particularly over her extended remarks on abortion — an issue she’s been talking about around the country since the fall of Roe. And it showed tonight.

Eugene Daniels: I’m going to shock you here: Harris. And honestly, she probably had the best night of any of Trump’s debate opponents since he began running for president in 2015. The Harris team was clear she wanted to bait him to get him to react in a way that suburban voters would be turned off by. She did it first by invoking his rally crowd sizes, then his criminal charges, on the Central Park Five, and over and over again. She got in his head from then on.

Democrats watching texted me that this is exactly the reason they wanted the switch from Biden to Harris: a candidate that could actually make the case against Trump.

Vice President Kamala Harris makes a surprise appearance at a Harris-Walz Debate Watch Party.
Vice President Kamala Harris makes a surprise appearance at a watch party after the debate. | Jamie Kelter Davis for POLITICO

Lisa Kashinsky: Another thing you can check besides the sound levels, Steve — what Trump’s allies are posting on X. Lots of claims of this being a “3 on 1” fight floating around. Trump and his backers went into this debate casting doubt on whether ABC’s moderators would treat him fairly. If they felt the debate was going his way, they wouldn’t still be saying that.

How will the debate change the trajectory of the race?

Shepard: This was a very close race before the debate, and it’s likely to be a close race a week from now. But Harris did clear an important bar. A disappointing debate performance threatened to reverse her standing after six weeks of momentum. That didn’t happen.

Wren: Given how tonight went, I would be surprised if there’s another debate — even though the Harris campaign said afterward she is “ready for a second debate. Is Donald Trump?” Trump might want a mulligan, but it’s difficult to see how his advisers would want to go through something like that again.

Daniels: Steve is right, the race is going to stay close until the very end. Harris went into this debate needing to prove that she could be unscripted, and she did that tonight. Does it change the election fully in her favor? Probably not. But it keeps people from running away from her.

For Trump, everything he did tonight is what voters are probably used to for him, whether they like it or not. For the MAGA faithful, nothing changed. But I’m not sure he pulled anyone who was on the fence into his camp, which means they both have a lot more work to do.

Kashinsky: Honestly, Taylor Swift endorsing Harris after the debate might do more to change the trajectory of this race than anything that happened during it.

Schneider: Swift didn’t call Trump the Smallest Man Who Ever Lived, but she might as well have.

What’s the one moment each candidate will regret, and what will we remember about this debate a year from now?

Schneider: What might go viral? I’m already seeing the memes of Harris’ facial expressions — a bemused smile, raised eyebrows, a hand under her chin — all over social media. Yes, Harris’ team was worried about the muted microphones, but they ultimately didn’t matter. Through body language, her decision to force a handshake with Trump and snippets of unmuted moments, Harris communicated all she needed about her opponent — underlining the moments when she baited him into his more off-the-rails comments.

Trump’s team, I’m sure, will regret that the former president didn’t more forcefully link Harris to Biden in the first 30 minutes of the debate. Harris’ team, however, may wish she’d more effectively pushed back on her policy flip-flops, as one of her key vulnerabilities is swing voters seeing her as more liberal.

Trump claims immigrants are eating cats and dogs during ABC debate

SharePlay Video
Wren: I’ll remember Trump engaging in the debunked conspiracy of animal eating in Springfield, Ohio — a low water mark of this conspiracy laden era. It is objectively a falsehood, criticized as misleading and racist, that Haitian immigrants have been abducting and eating pets. Town officials say that is not the case. Even his own running mate, the junior senator from the state — appeared to at least partially back away from the fabrication earlier in the day.

 MOST READ
UseUntil10.12.2024-KamalaCharlotte.012.jpg
The ‘wall of lava’ approaching Kamala Harris’ campaign
Trump ‘knock[s] the hell’ out of California during fundraising jaunt to the state
GOP lawmaker’s wife accuses him of an affair — and points the finger at the wrong woman
RT running covert military supply operation for Russian forces, State Dept. says
Former Canadian politicians blast Trump for spreading Trudeau-Castro conspiracy
And while we’re talking about Vance: He had somewhat of a rough night, with Trump essentially conceding they had different views on abortion (“I didn’t discuss it with JD, in all fairness, and I don’t mind if he has a certain view...”) Vance’s team have gone to great lengths to smooth out some of his statements on abortion since his 2022 Ohio Senate bid.

Former President Donald Trump speaks during a presidential debate.
Former President Donald Trump speaks during the debate. | Saul Loeb/AFP via Getty Images

Shepard: It’s hard to compare a head-to-head debate to the 10-candidate pile-ups that characterized the race for the Democratic nomination in 2020. But this was clearly Harris’ best debate performance of her career, without any clear missteps.

Meanwhile, one of Trump’s advantages in this race had been that voters didn’t see him as a riskier choice than Biden or Harris: Biden because of his age, and Harris because she was unproven. In the New York Times/Siena College poll this week, roughly equal percentages of likely voters (52 percent for Harris and 54 percent for Trump) saw each candidate as a “risky choice.”

But on a number of occasions — most notably citing television reports about the pet-eating immigrants allegedly overrunning a town in Ohio — Trump underlined some of the attributes that voters don’t like about him, as Harris cleared the bar of reasonableness.

It’s hard to drink from a firehose, but Harris might regret leaving some of Trump’s more potent attack lines unanswered, particularly on inflation.

Kashinsky: The abortion segment was brutal for Trump, and he only made it worse for himself by distancing himself from his own running mate. But if we’re talking about damaging sound bites: Trump saying he only has “concepts of a plan” on health care is one that Democrats can play on loop. In fact, they already are.

Both candidates left some key opportunities on the table. Harris could have done more to address concerns about the policy positions she’s changed over the years. And Trump didn’t dig in on one of his key lines of attack — why Harris hasn’t done the things she’s promising during her three years as vice president — until the end of the night.

Daniels: The abortion back-and-forth is going to play over and over again in ads and in news packages tomorrow morning. It was the first moment when the debate felt like one and you couldn’t find two candidates with more of a contrast on the issue. Harris, the lead on abortion for Democrats for years and Trump who got three Supreme Court picks who knocked down Roe.

For Trump’s regrets: I agree with Adam. It was a strange conspiracy theory before the debate and it played out even stranger on the debate stage with Trump going back and forth with David Muir on whether immigrants are eating pets (there’s zero evidence this is happening.)

I don’t know if she will regret it, but Harris still left some unanswered questions about positions she’s changed over the years. Trump brought it up over and over, she was asked directly about some of those from Linsey Davis and the folks who still have questions are left with “my values haven’t changed.”

Takeaways from the Harris-Trump presidential debate
By James Oliphant and Gram Slattery
September 11, 202411:15 AM EDTUpdated 3 days ago



Harris-Trump presidential debate hosted by ABC in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Republican presidential nominee, former President Donald Trump and Democratic presidential nominee, Vice President Kamala Harris attend the debate. REUTERS/Brian Snyder Purchase Licensing Rights, opens new tab
PHILADELPHIA, Sept 11 (Reuters) - Democrat Kamala Harris and Republican Donald Trump met on Tuesday for their first and perhaps only debate, a square-off that could have a significant impact on the Nov. 5 election as polls show a tight race.
Here are takeaways from the debate:
RILING HER RIVAL
Harris made a point to get under Trump's skin, as her campaign had forecast - and it worked.
She urged viewers to attend a Trump rally, where she said Trump would say bizarre things such as windmills cause cancer (something he has, in fact, said) and where, she taunted, attendees would leave out of exhaustion and boredom (something they have, in fact, done.)
Trump, who prides himself on the crowds he draws, was clearly riled.
"My rallies, we have the biggest rallies, the most incredible rallies in the history of politics," he said. He accused Harris of busing in attendees to her rallies.
Trump then falsely claimed that immigrants in the country illegally were killing and eating people's pets in the city of Springfield, Ohio, an unsubstantiated assertion that has circulated on social media and been amplified by Trump's vice presidential running mate JD Vance.
"In Springfield, they're eating the dogs! The people that came in, they're eating the cats!" Trump said. "They're eating the pets of the people that live there."
City officials in Springfield have said those reports are untrue, which the ABC moderators pointed out after Trump’s comments.
"Talk about extreme," Harris responded, laughing.
PLAYING DEFENSE
Another of Harris’ goals, as a former California prosecutor, was to call Trump out for his past actions, particularly his efforts to overturn the 2020 election.
An hour into the debate, her strategy appeared to be paying off. Trump was continually on the defensive.
Asked about the Jan. 6, 2021, siege of the U.S. Capitol, he insisted he “had nothing to do with that, other than they asked me to make a speech." He also maintained, falsely, that he had won the 2020 election.
Harris used Trump's actions as an argument for the country to turn the page, which she would do throughout the evening.
"Donald Trump was fired by 81 million people, so let's be clear about that, and clearly he is having a very difficult time processing that, but we cannot afford to have a president of the United States who attempts as he did in the past to upend the will of the voters in a free and fair election,” Harris said.
The vice president dug at Trump a little more, saying world leaders were “laughing” at him and calling him a disgrace – language that Trump has employed himself at rallies in reference to how he says other countries view President Joe Biden.
A few minutes later, Trump erupted, claiming Harris had received “no votes” in claiming the Democratic nomination and suggesting she replaced Biden as part of some sort of coup.
“He hates her,” Trump said of Biden. “He can’t stand her.”
The exchanges may have aided Harris' argument that Trump, as she put it, lacks the “temperament” to be president.
'WEAPONIZED' JUSTICE
Trump and Harris accused each other of conspiring to "weaponize" the Justice Department in a bid to go after their enemies.
Trump said the indictments he faces for conspiring to overturn his 2020 election loss and for his mishandling of classified documents - as well as his conviction for forging documents related to hush money payments to a porn star - are all the result of a conspiracy cooked up by Harris and Biden. There is no evidence for that assertion.
Harris shot back by pointing out that Trump has promised to prosecute his enemies if he wins a second term.
"Understand this is someone who has openly said he would terminate, I'm quoting, terminate the Constitution," Harris said.
The heated exchange underlined how Harris and Trump see the stakes of this election as existential. Both claimed their opponent to be a threat to democracy itself.
RACIAL DIVIDE
Deep into the debate, the long-simmering topic of race came up. Trump was asked why he had publicly questioned Harris’ dual heritage as a Black and South Asian woman.
“I don’t care what she is,” he responded. “I read that she was Black. Then I read that she was not Black.”
Asked to respond, Harris accused Trump of using race to divide Americans throughout his career. She cited how he and his father turned away Black renters in the 1970s and how Trump led the public outcry against five young Black and Latino men who were wrongly convicted of assaulting a jogger in New York City's Central Park in 1989.
He also has openly questioned whether President Barack Obama, who was born in the United States, was an American citizen, Harris noted.
"I think it's a tragedy that we have someone who wants to be president who has, consistently, over the course of his career, attempted to use race to divide the American people," she said.
"I think the American people want better than that," Harris added. "We don't want a leader who is constantly trying to have Americans point their fingers at each other."
Instead of trying to defend his record, Trump pivoted back to the economy and sought to pin Biden’s economic policies on Harris. “She’s trying to get away from Biden,” he said.
HANDSHAKE
Heading into the debate, there was a question as to how Harris and Trump, who have never met, would greet each other.
Harris settled the issue, definitively. She walked over to Trump at his podium, extended her hand and introduced herself as “Kamala Harris.”
It was an assertive way to approach a man who has spent weeks insulting her with racist and sexist attacks. Trump had no choice but to accept the gesture.
SPARRING ON THE ECONOMY
In the debate’s opening minutes, Trump and Harris went to battle on one of the issues that is top of mind for voters: the economy.
Harris detailed the economic policies she has rolled out in recent weeks, which include a substantial tax credit for small start-ups. Trump focused his comments on tariffs, saying he would protect the American economy from unfair foreign competition.
While both sides got their jabs in, Harris got to speak first on a topic where she trails Trump in terms of voter trust. She appeared to force the former president onto his back foot, and Trump essentially played defense on one of his strongest issues.
"She doesn't have a plan," Trump said, after Harris' opening comments. "It's like Run, Spot, Run."
A SCHISM ON ABORTION
The two candidates also engaged in a fractious debate about abortion, an issue where polls show Harris has the upper hand.
Trump defended the U.S. Supreme Court’s 2022 ruling that ended constitutional protection for abortion and sent the issue back to individual states, arguing, incorrectly, that it was an outcome desired by both Republicans and Democrats. Democrats have long supported a constitutional right to abortion.
“I did a great service in doing it. It took courage to do it,” Trump said.
Trump contended that some states allow babies to be aborted after birth, a point corrected by ABC News moderator, Linsey Davis.
Harris flashed some outrage at Trump’s assertion that abortion becoming a states-rights issue was a popular result, referring to states that have passed restrictive bans.
“This is what people wanted?” Harris asked. “People being denied care in an emergency room because healthcare providers are being afraid of being hauled off to jail?"
Trump was asked whether he would veto a federal abortion ban if one were passed by Congress. He insisted a federal ban would never happen.
WORLDS APART
One of the most heated policy discussions came when Trump and Harris clashed over how they would handle Russia's ongoing invasion of Ukraine.
The candidates' responses revealed the degree to which their views on America's role in the world fundamentally differ.
Trump refused to say he wanted Ukraine to win the war, even as ABC moderator David Muir pushed him on the point, saying only that he wanted to wrap up the conflict as soon as possible.
Harris shot back, arguing that what Trump really wanted was Ukraine's quick and unconditional capitulation.
"If Donald Trump were president, (Russian President Vladimir) Putin would be sitting in Kyiv right now," Harris said.
She also pushed back at Trump's claim she had been sent by Biden to talk to Putin to resolve the conflict. Harris has never met with Putin, but has met several times with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy.
"I said at the beginning of this debate, you're going to hear a bunch of lies coming from this fellow, and that is another one," Harris said.